# PX4 on X500 Setup

The following guide was created to setup a companion computer to integrate with the PX4 running on a X500 UAV

## [Setup/Installation] For interacting with PX4 V1.15 with ROS2 Jazzy on Ubuntu 24.04

The following steps can be used to setup a gazebo simulation of a PX4 X500 UAV with the following versions/software

- ROS Version: ROS2 Jazzy
- Ubuntu Version: Ubuntu 24.04
- Computer: Intel NUC-13
- PX4 Version: V1.15.2
- X500 Model: Pixhawk board: X500 v2 (Pixhawk 6X flight hardware)

### Preliminary Steps:
This guide assumes that the X500 has already been built, calibrated, configured and setup. The following document currently only shows you how to connect a companion computer to the PX4 via ROS2.

### 1. Install QGroundControl inorder to connect to and control UAV

Before setting up the PX4/ROS, QGroundControl must also be installed. Follow these steps to ensure that its installed correctly. To install it, please follow the steps on the [QGroundControl Download and Install instructions guide](https://docs.qgroundcontrol.com/master/en/qgc-user-guide/getting_started/download_and_install.html), and be sure to follow the instructions for "Ubuntu Linux".

### 2. Install ROS2 Jazzy
1. Install ROS2 Jazzy by following the instructions here: [ROS2 Jazzy Installation Guide](https://docs.ros.org/en/jazzy/Installation/Ubuntu-Install-Debs.html)
    - NOTE: If you are setting up ROS2 for your user acount on a machine that already has ROS2 installed on it, you should just be able to add the following command (or one similar to it) to your .bashrc file
    ```
    source /opt/ros/jazzy/setup.bash 
    ```
2. To enable connecting to the PX4 over ethernet using ROS2, the XRCE-DDS Client must be installed. To do so, follow the instructions for "Setup Micro XRCE-DDS Agent & Client" at the [PX4 ROS2 User Guide](https://docs.px4.io/v1.15/en/ros2/user_guide.html#setup-micro-xrce-dds-agent-client). Essentially the following commands will be executed:
    - Install the Micro-XRCE-DDS-Agent
    ```
    git clone https://github.com/eProsima/Micro-XRCE-DDS-Agent.git
    cd Micro-XRCE-DDS-Agent
    mkdir build
    cd build
    cmake ..
    make
    sudo make install
    sudo ldconfig /usr/local/lib/
    ```

3. Finally, in order to read/write PX4 message in ROS, the px4_ros_com and px4_msgs ROS2 packages must be included in ROS2 workspace's source directory (change ROS_PX4_2_WS to the desired ws)
    ```
    git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/cpsl-research/CPSL_ROS2_PX4.git
    ```

    If you forgot to clone the submodules as well, you can use the following command:
    ```
    git submodule update --init --recursive
    ```

    Once, cloned, the following commands can be used to build/install the necessary packages

    ```
    cd CPSL_ROS2_PX4
    colcon build --symlink-install
    source install/setup.bash
    rosdep install -i --from-path src --rosdistro jazzy -y
    ```

### 3.Install/Build the PX4 firmware (needed for a few tools)
Once ROS2, and QGroundControl are installed, we will then move to install the PX4 Source Code. While the following steps should help, helpful documentation can be found at [checkout release versions](https://docs.px4.io/v1.15/en/contribute/git_examples.html#get-a-specific-release) and [Ubuntu Setup](https://docs.px4.io/main/en/dev_setup/dev_env_linux_ubuntu.html). To do so, perform the following steps:
1. Clone the PX4 Source Code:
```
git clone https://github.com/PX4/PX4-Autopilot.git --recursive
```

2. Although not stated in the v1.15 guide, there should also be an Ubuntu setup script which can be used to make sure that all of the software is correctly setup for ubuntu. This can be run using the following command(as documented in [Ubuntu Setup (Main) guide](https://docs.px4.io/main/en/dev_setup/dev_env_linux_ubuntu.html)):
```
bash ./PX4-Autopilot/Tools/setup/ubuntu.sh --no-sim-tools
```

Note: the --no-sim-tools is used because we don't need gazebo in this case

### 4. Setup Ethernet on Nuc (Companion Computer)

**NOTE** Currently, the NUC13 cannot connect to the Pixhawk6x via ethernet on its own ethernet port. As such, you must use an ethernet adapter or ethernet switch to connect the Pixhawk6x to the NUC at this time. 

1. Go into your ethernet settings on the companion computer and setup the interface to have a static ip address of ```10.41.10.1``` with a subnet of ```255.255.255.0```. 

### 5. Setup Ethernet on PX4:
Several steps are needed to correctly setup ethernet on the PX4. Here, a helpful guide can be found at [PX4 Ethernet Network Setup](https://docs.px4.io/v1.15/en/advanced_config/ethernet_setup.html)

1. To start, we need to correctly set the ```net.cfg``` file on the Pixhawk's microSD card. To do so, eject the microSD card from the Pixhawk and open the files on another machine. Then, in the net.cfg file (create one if needed), add the following
```
DEVICE=eth0
BOOTPROTO=fallback
IPADDR=10.41.10.2
NETMASK=255.255.255.0
ROUTER=10.41.10.254
DNS=10.41.10.254
```
Once complete, put the SD card back into the Pixhawk and reboot the Pixhawk.

2. Once the PX4 has been rebooted, connect it to the companion computer via ethernet (in our case we power it using the NUC's USB cable as well). 

3. Open QGroundControl. If it doesn't automatically connect, try the following:
    
    - ensure that the serial ports are open/allowed by running the following command (make sure that PX4 is plugged in first)
    ```
    usermod -a -G dialout $USER
    chmod 666 /dev/ttyACM0
    ```
    - Setup Q ground control to look for an ethernet Comm link by following the (QGroundControl Ethernet Setup Example)[https://docs.px4.io/main/en/advanced_config/ethernet_setup.html#qgroundcontrol-setup-example] instructions.
4. Next, in QGround Control go to Q (top right corner) -> vehicle setup -> parameters to modify the following parameters:
    - ```UXRCE_DDS_CFG```: set to Ethernet (will require reboot to proceed with next steps)
    - ```UXRCE_DDS_PRT```: set to 8888 (unless changed to something else)
    - ```UXRCE_DDS_AG_IP```: set to 170461697 (corresponds to IP address of 10.41.10.1). See [starting the client](https://docs.px4.io/main/en/middleware/uxrce_dds.html#starting-the-client) instructions for further details
5. After this, you should just have to reboot the PX4 to have everything setup

### 6. Setup PX4 EKF2 (Vicon, GPS, and/or Optical flow/ranging)
In order to enable successful flight on the PX4, you must ensure that the PX4's EKF (extended kalman filter) is correctly configured. To do so, make sure that the following variables are set accordingly:

- ```EKF2_BARO_CTRL```:Disabled (disabling barometer as we have ranging sensor)
- ```EKF2_EV_CTRL```:Disabled (disabling external vision sensor aiding)
- ```EKF2_GPS_CHECK```: Disable all checks (disable GPS for indoor flights)
- ```EKF2_GHT_REF```: use range sensor (use range sensor for hieght estimation)
- ```EKF2_OF_CTRL```: Enabled (use optical flow for ekf)
- ```EKF2_RNG_CTRL```: Enabled (not conditional, use range sensor exclusively for altitude estimation)
- ```EKF2_MIN_RNG```: 0.23m (expected range finter range when on ground)

## [Running] Connecting to the PX4 via ROS2

The following tutorials are useful for connecting to the PX4 with ROS2

### Initial connection/listing available topics
1. Reboot the PX4

2. [optional] **Custom namespace** By default, the PX4 will publish messages in the namespace /fmu. If you would instead like to publish topics on a custom namespace (e.g.: /drone_1/fmu), perform the following steps:
    - In QGroundControl, go to ```Analyze Tools``` -> ```MAVLink Consol```. Then type the following commands (replace CUSTOM_NAMESPACE with the namespace you want to use):
    ```
    uxrce_dds_client stop
    uxrce_dds_client start -n CUSTOM_NAMESPACE
    ```
2. Start the MicroXRCEAgent
```
MicroXRCEAgent udp4 -p 8888
```
3. Listen to ROS2 topics
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_PX4
source install/setup.bash
ros2 topic list
```
4. To see a sample ROS2 node, you can optionally run:
```
ros2 launch px4_ros_com sensor_combined_listener.launch.py
```

## [Tutorials]

Below are several helpful tutorials to access data from a gazebo simulation in ROS

### 1a. Keyop Control of X500
A good example/preview for how to control the PX4 using ROS2 can be found in the [ROS 2 Offboard Control Example](https://docs.px4.io/v1.15/en/ros2/offboard_control.html) page. A summary of the key steps is featured below as an example. Make sure that the ROS2 nodes have already been setup as stated above and the you have run ```colcon build``` on any packages you intend to use.
1. Start QGroundControl

2. [terminal 1] Start the MicroXRCEAgent to enable the ROS2 connection
    ```
    MicroXRCEAgent udp4 -p 8888
    ```
3. [Terminal 2] Navigate to the CPSL_ROS2_PX4 ROS2 package folder
    ```
    cd CPSL_ROS2_PX4
    source install/setup.bash
    ros2 launch px4_controller control_only_launch.py
    ```
4. [Terminal 3], Next start the keyop control node to issue keyboard commands to the UAV
    ```
    cd CPSL_ROS2_PX4
    source install/setup.bash
    ros2 launch px4_controller keyop_only.launch.py
    ```
    **NOTE: THIS NODE RECORDS ALL KEYBOARD PRESSES, ONLY START WHEN READY TO CONTROL THE UAV**

    The currently implemented keyop controls are as follows:
    - "a" - arm the UAV
    - "d" - disarm the UAV
    - "t" - takeoff
    - "l" - land
4. The UAV should now automatically be placed in offboard control mode. If it isn't, use QGroundControl to put the PX4 into offboard control mode
5. Finally, use the keyboard commands to arm, then takeoff
6. To land the UAV, press the "l" key and then "d" to disarm the UAV once it has landed.

### 1b. Joypad Control of X500
A good example/preview for how to control the PX4 using ROS2 can be found in the [ROS 2 Offboard Control Example](https://docs.px4.io/v1.15/en/ros2/offboard_control.html) page. A summary of the key steps is featured below as an example. Make sure that the ROS2 nodes have already been setup as stated above and the you have run ```colcon build``` on any packages you intend to use.
1. Start QGroundControl

2. [terminal 1] Start the MicroXRCEAgent to enable the ROS2 connection
    ```
    MicroXRCEAgent udp4 -p 8888
    ```
3. [Terminal 2] Navigate to the CPSL_ROS2_PX4 ROS2 package folder
    ```
    cd CPSL_ROS2_PX4
    source install/setup.bash
    ros2 launch px4_controller joy_control_launch.py joy_enable:=true control_enable:=true namespace:=cpsl_uav_1
    ```

    The currently implemented controls are as follows:
    - "R2" - take the UAV
    - "L2" - disarm the UAV
    - "R1" - enable navigation commands (for autonomous mode, disables manual commands)
    - "R1" - Deadman switch (vehicle will hover unless this is pressed)
    - "triangle" - takeoff
    - "X" - land
    - "left joystick" - translation
    - "right joystick" - rotation (only left right used)

4. The UAV should now automatically be placed in offboard control mode. If it isn't, use QGroundControl to put the PX4 into offboard control mode.

### 2. Start all sensors with CPSL_ROS2_Sensors
If already configured, the sensors can be started using the following command:
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_Sensors
source install/setup.bash
ros2 launch cpsl_ros2_sensors_bringup uav_sensor_bringup.launch.py lidar_enable:=false lidar_scan_enable:=false camera_enable:=true radar_enable:=true front_radar_config_file:=radar_0_IWR1843_nav_dca_RadVel_5Hz.json platform_description_enable:=true rviz:=false namespace:=cpsl_uav_1
```
The parameters that can be used here are as follows: 
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |  
|-----------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------|  
| `namespace`   | ''  | the namespace of the robot |  
| `camera_enable`| true | on True, starts the camera node
| `lidar_enable`| true | on True, starts the livox lidar node
| `lidar_scan_enable`| false | on True, publishes a laserscan version of the livox's PC2 topic on /livox/lidar
| `radar_enable`| true | On True, launch the (front and back) TI radars
| `front_radar_config_file`| radar_0_IWR1843_demo.json | Radar configuration file in install/ti_radar_connect/share/ti_radar_connect/configs folder
| `platform_description_enable`| true | On true, publishes the UGV robot description tf tree
| `rviz`| true | On True, displays an RViz window of sensor data

### 3. Start GNN ROS2 Nodes (skip for now)
If the CPSL_ROS2_PCProcessing package has already been setup, the following code will start the relevant Nodes

1. go into the CPSL_ROS2_PC_Processing directory
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_PCProcessing
```
2. activate the poetry shell
```
poetry shell
```
4. Source the setup.bash file
```
source install/setup.bash
```
5. Finally, launch the ugv_gnn_bringup file
```
ros2 launch pc_processing uav_bringup.launch.py namespace:=cpsl_uav_1 scan_enable:=true
```

When launching, the following parameters can also be set by using the `parameter:=value` notation after the name of the launch file:
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |
|----------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|`namespace`|''|The robot's namespace|
|`param_file`| 'ugv_gnn.yaml'|YAML file with parameters for the nodes in the configs directory|
|`model_state_dict`| 'Sage_10fp_20fh_0_50_th_5mRng_0_2_res.pth'|.pth config file in the model_state_dicts folder|
|`scan_enable`| 'false'|If enabled, additionally publish a /LaserScan message on the radar_combined/scan topic|

### 4. Starting SLAM Stack (radar)
Once sensors are running, the following steps can start the SLAM pipeline:

1. Before takeoff, use the steps at the end of this document to reset the ekf2 on the px4. When performing slam, it is important that mapping start at the origin (i.e.: UAV is as close as possible to 0,0).

2. Once the odometry has been reset, then type the following commands to start the slam stack
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_Nav
source install/setup.bash
ros2 launch cpsl_nav slam_sync.launch.py slam_params_file:=slam_radar.yaml scan_topic:=/radar_combined/scan namespace:=cpsl_uav_1 base_frame_id:=base_footprint
```
When launching, the following parameters can also be set by using the `parameter:=value` notation after the name of the launch file:
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |
|----------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|`use_sim_time`|false|Use the time from a Gazebo simulation|
|`sync`|true|use synchronous SLAM (slower than asyncrhonous SLAM)|
|`namespace`|''|The robot's namespace|
|`scan_topic`|'/scan'|The LaserScan topic to use for slam (`/radar_combined/scan` for radar, `/livox/scan/` for lidar)|
|`autostart`|true| Automatically startup the slamtoolbox. Ignored when use_lifecycle_manager is true.|
|`use_lifecycle_manager`| false| Enable bond connection during node activation| 
|`slam_params_file`| 'slam.yaml'|Path to the SLAM Toolbox configuration file|
|`rviz`|false|Display an RViz window with navigation|

Once finished, open Rviz and use the slam rviz configuration in the cpsl_ros2_nav2 package to view/save the map.
    - If rviz is displayed, go into the SlamToolboxPlugin Window, specify the file name (e.g.;"building_1") without the .yaml/.pgm. and slick the "Save Map" button. The file will be saved in the current directory (CPSL_ROS2_Nav)

### 5. Starting SLAM Stack (lidar)
Once sensors are running, the following steps can start the SLAM pipeline:

1. Before takeoff, use the steps at the end of this document to reset the ekf2 on the px4. When performing slam, it is important that mapping start at the origin (i.e.: UAV is as close as possible to 0,0).

2. Once the odometry has been reset, then type the following commands to start the slam stack
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_Nav
source install/setup.bash
ros2 launch cpsl_nav slam_sync.launch.py slam_params_file:=slam_athena.yaml scan_topic:=/livox/scan namespace:=cpsl_uav_1 base_frame_id:=base_footprint
```
When launching, the following parameters can also be set by using the `parameter:=value` notation after the name of the launch file:
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |
|----------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|`use_sim_time`|false|Use the time from a Gazebo simulation|
|`namespace`|''|The robot's namespace|
|`scan_topic`|'/scan'|The LaserScan topic to use for slam (`/radar_combined/scan` for radar, `/livox/scan/` for lidar)|
|`base_frame_id`|'base_link'|The frame ID of the base_link frame (without tf pre-fix)|
|`autostart`|true| Automatically startup the slamtoolbox. Ignored when use_lifecycle_manager is true.|
|`use_lifecycle_manager`| false| Enable bond connection during node activation| 
|`slam_params_file`| 'slam.yaml'|Path to the SLAM Toolbox configuration file|
|`rviz`|false|Display an RViz window with navigation|

Once finished, open Rviz and use the slam rviz configuration in the cpsl_ros2_nav2 package to view/save the map.
    - If rviz is displayed, go into the SlamToolboxPlugin Window, specify the file name (e.g.;"building_1") without the .yaml/.pgm. and slick the "Save Map" button. The file will be saved in the current directory (CPSL_ROS2_Nav)

To save the serialized map to a file, use the following code: 
```
ros2 service call /cpsl_uav_1/slam_toolbox/serialize_map slam_toolbox/SerializePoseGraph "{filename: 'uav_map'}"
```

### 6. Starting localization (radar)
In stead of SLAM, you can run a localization pipeline and navigation (see next step). To start localizaiton, Run the following steps:

1. Open RVIZ2 and use the either the nav_config.rviz or slam_config.rviz files in CPSL_ROS2_Nav/src/cpsl_nav/rviz_cfgs. This must be done first in order for the map to appear. When started, you will not see anything until the next step as the nav2 pipeline publishes the map->odom transformation.

2. Drive the UGV around to make sure that the point clouds are publishing correclty. 

3. run the following commands. Change the map file to be the name of a map in the CPSL_ROS2_Nav/src/cpsl_nav/maps folder. 
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_Nav
source install/setup.bash
ros2 launch cpsl_nav localization.launch.py scan_topic:=/radar_combined/scan map:=wilk_radar.yaml param_file:=localization_radar.yaml
```
4. Once launched, you will then have to set a start location. Wait for the map to appear in the rviz window. Then use, rviz to specify the current location of the ground vehicle. Once this is done, everything in the rviz window should now appear. 

### 7a. Starting navigation (lidar)
Finally, to run navigation, run the following commands to start the navigation pipeline. 
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_Nav
source install/setup.bash
ros2 launch cpsl_nav nav2.launch.py namespace:=cpsl_uav_1 params_file:=nav2_uav.yaml
```

When launching, the following parameters can also be set by using the `parameter:=value` notation after the name of the launch file:
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |
|----------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|`use_sim_time`|false|Use the time from a Gazebo simulation|
|`namespace`|''|The robot's namespace|
|`params_file`| "nav2_ugv.yaml" | the .yaml config to use in the config folder
|`autostart`|true| Automatically startup the slamtoolbox. Ignored when use_lifecycle_manager is true.|
|`use_lifecycle_manager`| false| Enable bond connection during node activation| 
|`slam_params_file`| 'slam.yaml'|Path to the SLAM Toolbox configuration file|
|`rviz`|false|Display an RViz window with navigation|

### 7b. Starting navigation (radar)
Finally, to run navigation, run the following commands to start the navigation pipeline. 
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_Nav
source install/setup.bash
ros2 launch cpsl_nav nav2.launch.py namespace:=cpsl_uav_1 params_file:=nav2_uav_radar.yaml
```

When launching, the following parameters can also be set by using the `parameter:=value` notation after the name of the launch file:
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |
|----------------|--------------|------------------------------------------------------|
|`use_sim_time`|false|Use the time from a Gazebo simulation|
|`namespace`|''|The robot's namespace|
|`params_file`| "nav2_ugv.yaml" | the .yaml config to use in the config folder
|`autostart`|true| Automatically startup the slamtoolbox. Ignored when use_lifecycle_manager is true.|
|`use_lifecycle_manager`| false| Enable bond connection during node activation| 
|`slam_params_file`| 'slam.yaml'|Path to the SLAM Toolbox configuration file|
|`rviz`|false|Display an RViz window with navigation|

### 8. Collecting a dataset

For offline analysis or training, the following command can be used:
```
cd CPSL_ROS2_Sensors
source install/setup.bash
ros2 launch dataset_generator record_dataset.launch.py namespace:=cpsl_uav_1 param_file:=uav_dataset.yaml
```

The parameters that can be used by using the ```parameter:=value``` notation: 
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |  
|-----------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------|  
| `namespace`   | ''  | the namespace of the robot |  
| `param_file`| 'ugv_dataset.yaml' | the .yaml config file in the configs directory of the dataset_generator package.


### 9. Export to vizar bridge

To stream data to the Vizar bridge, first ensure that the vizar repo has been installed at [vizar github repo](https://github.com/EasyVizAR/ros2-vizar-bridge) and have the following environment variables set accordingly:
```
ROS_MAP_TOPIC=/map
ROS_POSE_TOPIC=/pose
VIZAR_SERVER=http://localhost:5000
VIZAR_LOCATION="ROS Testing"
VIZAR_DEVICE="ROS Tester"
```

Then, run the following commands:
```
cd ros2-vizar-bridge
python3 -m ros2_vizar_bridge
```

The parameters that can be used by using the ```parameter:=value``` notation: 
| **Parameter** | **Default** | **Description** |  
|-----------|--------------------------|---------------------------------------------|  
| `namespace`   | ''  | the namespace of the robot |  
| `param_file`| 'ugv_dataset.yaml' | the .yaml config file in the configs directory of the dataset_generator package.

## Helpful Instructions

### 1. Running NoMachine in a headless (i.e.; without a monitor) mode
Note, the following instructions only need to be performed once. To run NoMachine in a headless mode, running the following commands on the server's terminal:
```
sudo systemctl stop gdm
sudo /etc/NX/nxserver --restart
```
### 2. Re-setting the ekf2 (e.g.; to do mapping)
To reset the ekf2 for a new origin point, perform the following steps:
1. Open Q-Ground control
2. Click on the Q in the top left corner, then click on "Analyze Tools"
3. In the analyze tools, click on "MAVLink Console"
4. Then in the terminal window, type the following commands
```
ekf2 stop
ekf2 start
```

## Helpful Links: 
- [Building PX4 firmware instructions](https://docs.px4.io/v1.15/en/dev_setup/building_px4.html#nuttx-pixhawk-based-boards)
- [Pixhawk 6X Px4 page](https://docs.px4.io/main/en/flight_controller/pixhawk6x.html)
- [ROS2 Jazzy Installation Guide](https://docs.ros.org/en/jazzy/Installation/Ubuntu-Install-Debs.html)
- [PX4 Ethernet Network Setup](https://docs.px4.io/v1.15/en/advanced_config/ethernet_setup.html)
- [PX4 Flight Modes](https://docs.px4.io/main/en/flight_modes_mc/)
- [ROS_GZ_Bridge Tutorial](https://gazebosim.org/docs/harmonic/ros2_integration/)
- [ROS_GZ_Bridge Github readme](https://github.com/gazebosim/ros_gz/tree/jazzy/ros_gz_bridge)
- [Gazebo Tutorials](https://gazebosim.org/docs/harmonic/tutorials/)
- [uORB Message Definitions](https://docs.px4.io/main/en/msg_docs/)
- [usb-cam](https://docs.ros.org/en/humble/p/usb_cam/)